Pod Mutable Scheduling Directives (#3840)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-scheduling/3838-pod-mutable-scheduling-directives/README.md

  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

In [#3521](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-scheduling/3521-pod-scheduling-readiness) 
we introduced PodSchedulingReadiness. 

> The main use case for this feature was to enable building external resource controllers (like extended schedulers, 

Reviewer: The main use case of [PodSchedulingReadiness](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-scheduling/3521-pod-scheduling-readiness) was to ...

dynamic quota managers) to make a decision on when the pod should be eligible for scheduling by kube-scheduler.

This enhancement proposes to make pod scheduling directives (nodeSelector, affinity) mutable as long as the pod

> is gated and the update only further constrains the scheduling of the pod, and doesn't expand it.

Reviewer: Not sure if it's my English or not, just wondering if we can change "expand" with "relax"?

```suggestion
is gated and the update only further constrains the scheduling of the pod rather than relaxing it.
```

Author: Changed the sentence.

This allows external resource controllers to not only decide when the pod should be eligible for scheduler, but 

> also where it should land. This is similar to what we did for suspended Job in [#2926](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-scheduling/2926-job-mutable-scheduling-directives); 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
also where it should land. This is similar to what we did for suspended Job in [#2926](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-scheduling/2926-job-mutable-scheduling-directives).
```

useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

## Motivation

Adding the ability to mutate a Pod's scheduling directives before it is allowed to schedule 
gives an external resource controller (like a network toplogy-aware scheduler or a dynamic 
quota managers) the ability to influence placement while at the same time offloading actual 
pod-to-node assignment to the existing kube-scheduler.

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

### Goals

> - Allow adding node affinity or node selector of a pod that is blocked on a
>   scheduling readiness gate.

Reviewer: (let's refrain from using "add" avoid ambiguity)

```suggestion
- Allow applying more constrained node affinity/selector for a pod that is blocked on a
  scheduling readiness gate.
```

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

### Non-Goals

- Allow mutating scheduling directives of pods unconditionally.
- Restrict updating tolerations on scheduling gates. We already allow adding tolerations 

>   unconditionally, and so restricting that to gated pods is a backward incompatible change.

Reviewer: Did we allow "add" or "update" for tolerations changes of created pods? (better make the wordings consistent)

Author: We allow adding only.

Author: done.

- Allow mutating pod affinity constraints. It is not clear how this can be done without

>   potentially violating a policy check that we previously done at pod CREATE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  potentially violating a policy check that was previously done at pod CREATE time.
```

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

## Proposal

The proposal is to relax update validation of scheduling directives, specifically node affinity and selector, of Pods that

> are blocked on a scheduling readiness gate (i.e., not yet considered for scheduling by kube-scheduler), specifically. Note

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are scheduling gated (i.e., not yet considered for scheduling by kube-scheduler), specifically. Note
```

Author: updated the paragraph, but kept the original one sentence, I think it is clearer.

that adding tolerations and mutating labels and annotations are already allowed.

This has no impact on the applications controllers. The applications controller generally has no dependency
on those scheduling directives expressed in the application's pod template.

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

I want to build a controller that implements workload queueing and influences when and where a 

> workload should run. The workload controller creates the pods a workload instance, and to control 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
workload should run. The workload controller creates the pods as a workload instance, and to control 
```

when and where the workload can run, I have a webhook that injects a scheduling readiness gate, 
and a controller that removes the gate when capacity becomes available.

> At the time of creating the workload, we may not know on which part of the cluster (.e.g., a zone or 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time of creating the workload, we may not know on which part of the cluster (e.g., a zone or 
```

a VM type) a workload should run. To control where a workload should run, the controller can update 
node affinity of the workload's pods; by doing so, the queue controller is able to influence the 
scheduler and autoscaler decisions.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

> - New calls from a queue controller to the API server to update affinity or tolerations. 

Reviewer: Are you trying to say "selector" instead of "tolerations"?

Author: yes, updated.

  The mitigation is for such controllers to make a single API call for both updating
  affinity/tolerations and removing the scheduling gate.

- App controllers may find it surprising that the pod they created is different from their
  template. Typically apps, like ReplicaSets, don't continusly reconile existing pods
  to match the template, they react only to change to the pod template in the app's
  spec. Moreover, the side affects of this proposal is no different from a mutating 
  webhook that injects affinity onto the pod.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add a bullet to mention a faulty-implemented controller that may inject inaccurate node affinity, which can cause the following side effects:

- make the pod unschedulable, which increases the overall scheduling latency, and triggers CA
- the pod is scheduled, but with a cost of preempting unnecessary victims

Author: This is a risk associated with the node affinity/selector feature, not updating it. A pod can be created with affinity that causes those issues.

Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

The pod update validation logic in the API server already allows updating labels and 
annotations, it also allows adding tolerations. What we need to do is relax the validation
on adding node affinity and node selector.

There are two main problems we need to address:

1) Race conditions between adding an affinity and kube-scheduler scheduling the pod. As mentioned before,
the solution is to restrict the updates to pods with scheduling gates. This prevents the race condition.

2) Invalidating a decision made by a policy admission webhook. The concern here is that some of those policy
webhooks validate node affinity/selector on CREATE only and don't trigger that validation on UPDATE because 
they assumed the fields are immutable. This can be addressed by allowing updates
to node selector/affinity that only further constrain the selection. 

For `spec.nodeSelector`, only additions are allowed. For `spec.nodeAffinity`, 

> `.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution.NodeSelectorTerms`

Reviewer: Do we want to allow deletion of nodeSelectorTerms?

Author: We will only allow additions, no changes to existing terms will be allowed. This is easier to reason about.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

<!--
Based on reviewers feedback describe what additional tests need to be added prior
implementing this enhancement to ensure the enhancements have also solid foundations.
-->

##### Unit tests

<!--
In principle every added code should have complete unit test coverage, so providing
the exact set of tests will not bring additional value.
However, if complete unit test coverage is not possible, explain the reason of it
together with explanation why this is acceptable.
-->

<!--
Additionally, for Alpha try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/apis/core/validation`: `02/03/2023` - `83%`

##### Integration tests

- Test that adding node affinity to a pod with no scheduling gates should be rejected.

> - Test that adding affinity that expands the existing constraints should always be rejected, even for pods with scheduling gates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Test that adding node affinity that relaxes the existing constraints should always be rejected, even for pods with scheduling gates.
```

> - Test that adding affinity that constraints the node selection to a pod with scheduling gates should be allowed. Also, test that the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Test that adding node affinity that constraints the node selection to a pod with scheduling gates should be allowed. Also, test that the 
```

- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

In [#3521](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-scheduling/3521-pod-scheduling-readiness) 
we introduced PodSchedulingReadiness. The main use case for PodSchedulingReadiness was to 
enable building external resource controllers (like extended schedulers, dynamic quota managers) 
to make a decision on when the pod should be eligible for scheduling by kube-scheduler.

This enhancement proposes to make the pod scheduling directives node selector and node 
affinity mutable as long as the pod is gated and the update to node selector/affinity 

> further limits the existing constrains. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
further limits the existing constraints. 
```

  affinity/selector and removing the scheduling gate.

- App controllers may find it surprising that the pod they created is different from their
  template. Typically apps don't continusly reconile existing pods
  to match the template, they react only to change to the pod template in the app's
  spec. Moreover, the side affects of this proposal is no different from a mutating 
  webhook that injects affinity onto the pod.

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

The pod update validation logic in the API server already allows updating labels and 
annotations, it also allows adding new tolerations. What we need to do is to relax the update validation
on node affinity/selector.

There are two main problems we need to address:

1) Race conditions between updating node affinity/selector constraints and the kube-scheduler when scheduling

> the pod. As mentioned before, the solution is to restrict the updates to pods with scheduling gates. This

Reviewer 2: is it valid to submit a single update which removes the last scheduling gate and updates scheduling rules? if so, this would be good to call out explicitly

> the pod. As mentioned before, the solution is to restrict the updates to pods with scheduling gates. This

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the pod. As mentioned before, the solution is to restrict the updates to unscheduled pods with scheduling gates. This
```

Reviewer 2: this is more a question for the scheduling gate feature, but do we always validate that spec.nodeName remains unset if the pod still has scheduling gates set (in pod create, update, and bind validation)? it looks like create only does that validation if the feature is enabled, which doesn't look right... that validation should be driven off the populated fields, not the feature gate

Reviewer 2: >> it looks like create only does that validation if the feature is enabled, which doesn't look right... that validation should be driven off the populated fields, not the feature gate
>
> We can adjust that, but the scheduler also ignores gated pods only when the feature is on, should we make it on all the time then?

validation should never permit nodeName and schedulingGates to be populated simultaneously, regardless of feature enablement. That ensures persisted API data is always coherent for downstream components to make use of.

Reviewer 2: looks like BindingREST#setPodHostAndAnnotations and ValidatePodCreate both need to be updated to do their validation unconditionally

Author: I added a comment to the issue tracking pod scheduling readiness: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/113608#issuecomment-1419389539

Reviewer: >  That ensures persisted API data is always coherent for downstream components to make use of.

Thanks for raising this. It looks like it will impact vanilla components as well, in an upgrade->rollback scenario like this:

- spin up a 1.26 cluster, but with `PodSchedulingReadiness=true`
- create a pod carrying one scheduling gate
- the pod stays in `SchedulingGated` state
- re-start API Server and scheduler, but with `PodSchedulingReadiness=false`
- (with current logic) the pod enters `Running` state (suppose it requests little resource) while also having non-empty `.spec.schedulingGates` present

So @liggitt @ahg-g, do you think this scenario is concerning? If not, I will pursue the "unconditional validation" change in 1.27; otherwise, we may backport it to 1.26.

Reviewer 2: I would make it in 1.27 and backport

prevents the race condition.

2) Invalidating a decision made by a policy admission webhook. The concern here is that some of those policy
webhooks validate node affinity/selector on CREATE only and don't trigger that validation on UPDATE because 
they assumed the fields are immutable. This can be addressed by allowing updates
to node selector/affinity that only further constrain the selection. 

> For `spec.nodeSelector`, only additions are allowed. For `spec.nodeAffinity`, 

Reviewer 2: if `spec.nodeSelector` is absent, it would be allowed to be set, correct?

Reviewer 2: `spec.nodeAffinity` doesn't exist, `spec.affinity.nodeAffinity` does

would the following would change be permitted?
* `spec.affinity` changing from `null` to set with only `{nodeAffinity: ...}` populated
* `spec.affinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` changing from `null` to set
* `spec.affinity.preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` changing from zero-length to set

Reviewer 2: it might be helpful to break out `spec.nodeSelector`, `spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` and `spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` into their own paragraphs, and describe the exact transitions allowed for each

Author: Updated.

`.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution.NodeSelectorTerms`
are ORed, while `nodeSelectorTerms[].matchExpressions` list and 
`nodeSelectorTerms[].fieldExpressions` are ANDed, and so for pods with existing 

> `nodeAffinity` terms, only additions of `NodeSelectorRequirements` to `matchExpressions` 

Reviewer 2: this "only append to matchExpressions or fieldExpressions of existing terms" makes sense for existing pods which already have `spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` term(s)

since `preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` can already be ignored if needed by the scheduler, and it doesn't look like there's a way to tack on additional qualifiers to existing terms in that list, appending to the  preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution list seems more reasonable

or `fieldExpressions` are allowed; for pods with no `nodeAffinity` terms, then 
adding anything is allowed. 

> No changes to existing terms will be allowed since that makes it harder to reason about the change and it is not necessary

Reviewer 2: > No changes to existing terms will be allowed...

that's confusing... isn't the paragraph above saying that for pods with existing `spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` terms, we would *only* allow changing existing terms by adding to matchExpressions or fieldExpressions, not adding/removing terms?

However, if complete unit test coverage is not possible, explain the reason of it
together with explanation why this is acceptable.
-->

<!--
Additionally, for Alpha try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/apis/core/validation`: `02/03/2023` - `83%`

##### Integration tests

- Test that adding node affinity to a pod with no scheduling gates should be rejected.
- Test that adding node affinity/selector that relaxes the existing constraints should always be rejected, even for pods with scheduling gates.
- Test that adding node affinity/selector that constraints the node selection to a pod with scheduling gates should be allowed. Also, test that the 
  scheduler observes the update and acts on it when the scheduling gate is lifted.

> - Test feature enablement/disablement.

Reviewer 3: See my comment below.

Author: removed

for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.

Documentation is available on [feature gate lifecycle] and expectations, as
well as the [existing list] of feature gates.

[feature gate lifecycle]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

>   - Feature gate name:

Reviewer 3: Please fill in

Author: updated.

    of a node? (Do not assume `Dynamic Kubelet Config` feature is enabled).

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

Yes, it relaxes validation of updates to pods. Specifically, it will allow
mutating the node selector and affinity.

<!--
Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
automations, so be extremely careful here.
-->

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

Yes. If disabled, kube-apiserver will start rejecting mutating node affinity/selector of pods.

<!--
Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
feature, can it break the existing applications?).

Feature gates are typically disabled by setting the flag to `false` and
restarting the component. No other changes should be necessary to disable the
feature.

NOTE: Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
-->

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

kube-apiserver will accept node affinity/selector updates for pods.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

> We will add integration tests to cover that as discussed above.

Reviewer 3: Given it's gated by the feature-gate, enabling/disabling the feature required restarting the component.
It's purely in-memory feature, so I would say that explicitly enablement/disablement test isn't really needed here (we need regular feature tests which are tracked elsewhere).

Author: changed to N/A

-->

### Monitoring Requirements

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

N/A. This is not a feature that workloads use directly.

<!--
Ideally, this should be a metric. Operations against the Kubernetes API (e.g.,
checking if there are objects with field X set) may be a last resort. Avoid
logs or events for this purpose.
-->

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

<!--
For instance, if this is a pod-related feature, it should be possible to determine if the feature is functioning properly
for each individual pod.
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
Please describe all items visible to end users below with sufficient detail so that they can verify correct enablement
and operation of this feature.
Recall that end users cannot usually observe component logs or access metrics.
-->

- [ ] Events
  - Event Reason: 
- [ ] API .status
  - Condition name: 
  - Other field: 

> - [ ] Other (treat as last resort)

Reviewer 3: nit: mark it

  - Details: Create a pod with a scheduling gate, then update the node selector of the pod.

> ###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

Reviewer 3: I'm fine with saying No SLO for this feature, but please make that explicit.

Author: updated.

for a feature.

It's impossible to provide comprehensive guidance, but at the very
high level (needs more precise definitions) those may be things like:
  - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
  - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99.9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next
question.
-->

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

<!--
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
-->

- [X] Metrics
  - Metric name: apiserver_request_total[resource=pod, group=, verb=UPDATE, code=400]
  - [Optional] Aggregation method:
  - Components exposing the metric:
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

<!--
Describe the metrics themselves and the reasons why they weren't added (e.g., cost,
implementation difficulties, etc.).

> -->

Reviewer 3: No :)

notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

## Motivation

Adding the ability to mutate a Pod's scheduling directives before it is allowed to schedule 
gives an external resource controller (like a network toplogy-aware scheduler or a dynamic 
quota manager) the ability to influence pod placement while at the same time offload actual 
pod-to-node assignment to kube-scheduler. 

In general, this opens the door for a new pattern of adding scheduling features to Kubernetes.
Specifically, building lightweight schedulers that implement features not supported by kube-scheduler,

> while relying on the existing kube-scheduler to support all upstream featuers and handle the pod-to-node

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
while relying on the existing kube-scheduler to support all upstream features and handle the pod-to-node
```

Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

I want to build a controller that implements workload queueing and influences when and where a 
workload should run. The workload controller creates the pods of a workload instance. To control 
when and where the workload should run, I have a webhook that injects a scheduling readiness gate, 
and a controller that removes the gate when capacity becomes available.

At the time of creating the workload, it may not be known on which subset of the nodes (e.g., a zone or 
a VM type) a workload should run. To control where a workload should run, the controller updates 
the node selector/affinity of the workload's pods; by doing so, the queue controller is able to influence the 
scheduler and autoscaler decisions.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.

> -->

Reviewer 4: add a note that this is a one-way operation (no rollback).

If a decision changes, the external controller probably should delete the pod so that something else recreates it.

Author: good point, added.

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 4: Another risk (or note): fields are atomic, meaning that they can't be added via SSA independently and the controller owns the entire nodeSelector field.

Author: If two controllers try to update at the same time, one of them will get a conflict and can try again, and this is not different to other mutable atomic fields, so I am not sure why this is worth noting here?

Reviewer 4: if the two controllers use SSA, they might both succeed and overwrite each others' update. Same with Job template actually.

Did I get that right @liggitt ?

Reviewer 2: there's two issues... 

1. whether the fields being updated support multiple SSA owners - atomic fields don't
2. how the controllers are updating, and whether they're trying to avoid conflicts - controllers have multiple ways they can update:
  * SSA with ?force=false - this would return a conflict error if they touched an atomic field owned by someone else
  * SSA with ?force=true - this would stomp the atomic field owned by someone else with what they applied and steal ownership
  * read/update/write - this would stomp the field with what they wrote and steal ownership 
  * other patch types (jsonpatch, mergepatch, etc) - this would patch the field with what they wrote and steal ownership

Author: If those semantics are documented somewhere, then this KEP can refer to it, but I don't think it should document them here since it isn't proposing something that changes them.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I agree

Reviewer 4: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#merge-strategy

What is relevant in this KEP is that the fields are atomic.

for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.

Documentation is available on [feature gate lifecycle] and expectations, as
well as the [existing list] of feature gates.

[feature gate lifecycle]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

>   - Feature gate name: PodSchedulingReadiness

Reviewer 4: Add a note that this is not new, but comes from another KEP

Author: added

  - [Monitoring Requirements](#monitoring-requirements)
  - [Dependencies](#dependencies)
  - [Scalability](#scalability)
  - [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Use webhooks to inject affinities](#use-webhooks-to-inject-affinities)
- [Infrastructure Needed (Optional)](#infrastructure-needed-optional)
<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

<!--
**ACTION REQUIRED:** In order to merge code into a release, there must be an
issue in [kubernetes/enhancements] referencing this KEP and targeting a release
milestone **before the [Enhancement Freeze](https://git.k8s.io/sig-release/releases)
of the targeted release**.

For enhancements that make changes to code or processes/procedures in core
Kubernetes—i.e., [kubernetes/kubernetes], we require the following Release
Signoff checklist to be completed.

Check these off as they are completed for the Release Team to track. These
checklist items _must_ be updated for the enhancement to be released.
-->

Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

> - [ ] (R) Enhancement issue in release milestone, which links to KEP dir in [kubernetes/enhancements] (not the initial KEP PR)

Reviewer 4: Need to mark the relevant items when targetting the milestone

Author: marked

    of a node? (Do not assume `Dynamic Kubelet Config` feature is enabled).

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

Yes, it relaxes validation of updates to pods. Specifically, it will allow
mutating the node selector and affinity.

<!--
Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
automations, so be extremely careful here.
-->

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

Yes. If disabled, kube-apiserver will start rejecting mutating node affinity/selector of pods.

<!--
Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
feature, can it break the existing applications?).

Feature gates are typically disabled by setting the flag to `false` and
restarting the component. No other changes should be necessary to disable the
feature.

NOTE: Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
-->

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

kube-apiserver will accept node affinity/selector updates for pods.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

> N/A.

Reviewer 3: nit: I would prefer saying why it is N/A for future reference. Sth like

No explicit enablement/disablement test as this is purely in-memory feature.
